---
layout: post
title:  "Virtual Memory"
date:   2000-04-01
---

This document explains in a fair amount of detail the paged virtual memory
system in line with the discussions of the CPS 104 lectures and notes on the
subject.

* Table of contents
{:toc}

In order to get much of anything out of this document, the reader should be at
least a little familiar with virtual memory. I do not intend for this document
to be used for a student that knows nothing about virtual memory but wants to
learn. I do not believe that it is suited for that task. I instead intend it for
someone that has at least given the class notes and the book's section on
virtual memory a once-over.

Like all of my writings, it is long. Also like all of my writings, I have
attempted to write it so each section is largely independent of the others, so
that if you are unfamiliar with one aspect of virtual memory, you can jump to
that particular section and skip the rest.

Also, virtual memory is not a trivial concept like floating point or two's
complement. I like to think I can explain things well, but that doesn't mean
that you can not read carefully and still walk away with a good understanding.

## General Description

This section contains a very broad description of the paged virtual memory
system.

### Impetus for Virtual Memory

The problem is this. Memory addresses are comprised of 32 bits, and each
different address references a different byte. 2<sup>32</sup> is about four
billion bytes. How many computers have four gigabytes worth of main memory? What
if a program attempts to access memory outside of that address space? Can we
count on programmers to do the right things with memory all the time? What if
two systems have different amounts of memory? In order to make a program
compatible with both machines we would have to limit our usage of memory to the
addresses valid in the machine with the least amount of memory. So what's the
point of buying extra RAM if all programs are written to run on a system with a
minimum thirty-two megabytes of RAM?

There are other problems too, all because the address space does not truly
reflect the amount of RAM available. Wouldn't it be nice if we could fool
programs into thinking that they have a lot more RAM available to them than they
truly do?

### What Virtual Memory Is

Virtual memory is a system by which the machine or operating system fools
processes running on the machine into thinking that they have a lot more memory
to work with than the capacity of RAM would indicate. It does this by storing
the most recently used items in RAM, and storing the lesser used items in the
slower disk memory, and interchanging data between the two whenever a disk
access is made. In this way, memory appears to programs to be a full 32 bit
address space, when it fact memory space is probably only a mere fraction of
that.

### The Virtual Address

How can this be done? We are able to address byte `0xFFFFFFFF`. But there is no
byte `0xFFFFFFFF` in our main memory. So where is byte `0xFFFFFFFF`? Somewhere
other than byte `0xFFFFFFFF` in RAM, since such an index that large does not
exist in RAM. Obviously, the relation between an address and its actual location
in memory is not as simple as previously thought. Your friend told you the
memory you're looking for at address `0x00000010` is stored in the seventeenth
byte in main memory. Your "friend" lied to you.

The way it works:  The programs request memory at a certain address. Now, this
address isn't the REAL address for this data; it is a virtual address. The
memory system then checks to see where the data for this virtual address really
is, based on a reference to something called the page table. After looking up
this address in the page table to tell where it is, it does one of two things.
If the memory is already in main memory, it returns the real address in main
memory, at which point the write to or reading from memory is done. If the data
we're looking for is not yet in RAM, then the memory system retrieves the data
from the disk (where data that cannot fit in RAM is stored), puts it into RAM,
and THEN returns the address at which it can be found.

### Pages, and the Virtual Page Number

To take advantage of spacial locality as well as hardware issues with disk mass
storage, it is important to know that just as lines of data in cache would often
be larger than one byte or four bytes (in some systems cache lines are
thirty-two or sixty-four bytes), "lines" of data in a virtual memory system are
often 2048 bytes, 4096 bytes, or 8192 bytes. Also, these "lines" are called
pages. The page is the quantum unit of transfer between disk and main memory in
a virtual memory system, just as a line was the quantum unit of transfer between
cache and RAM. If you ask for a word of memory not in RAM, not just the word,
but a whole page's worth of data from the disk is loaded into RAM.

Pages in a virtual address space are continuous. In a 4096 byte page virtual
memory system, the first page in virtual memory would be addresses `0x00000000`
to `0x00000FFF`. The last page in virtual memory would be `0xFFFFF000` to
`0xFFFFFFFF`. In this example, the first twenty bits uniquely identify each page
in the virtual address space. Therefore, since each page in the virtual address
space may be uniquely identified by a certain number of the leading bits of the
virtual address, we call that number the "virtual page number."

If we have an N bit virtual address space (in our example it is thirty two), and
we have 2<sup>M</sup> page size (in our example, M = 12), then the leading N-M
bits (in our example the leading 32-12 = 20 bits) comprise the virtual page
number that uniquely identifies each page in the virtual address space.

The lower M bits tell us which byte of this page is the byte we're looking for,
and is called the "page offset." The page offset is more or less the exact
analogy of the cache's "byte select field." It tells us which byte of our
2<sup>M</sup> byte page we're trying to access.

### The Virtual Page Number through Examples

For some examples of this, I provide some virtual addresses with the page size
of the system. I then tell what the page is, and what the page offset is.

1. **Virtual address `0x000A502F`, with page size of 4K bytes**: A page size of
   4K = 4096 = 2<sup>12</sup>, so the last 12 bits are used as the page offset
   to tell just what byte of the page we want. Therefore the first 20 bits
   uniquely identify this page, and comprise the virtual page number.

   | Virtual Page Number    | Page Offset  |
   |-----------------------:|:-------------|
   |0000 0000 0000 1010 0101|0000 0010 1111|

   So the virtual page number is 165, and 47 is the page offset. So we're
   looking for the 48th byte (since 0 page offset indicates the 1st byte of the
   page) of the 166th page (similarly, since a page number of 0 indicates the
   1st page).

2. **Virtual address `0x000A502F`, with page size of 2K bytes.** The same
   address, but different page size. A page size of 2K = 2048 = 2<sup>11</sup>,
   so the last 11 bits are used as the page offset to tell just what byte of the
   page we want. Therefore the first 21 bits uniquely identify this page, and
   comprise the virtual page number.

   | Virtual Page Number      | Page Offset |
   |-------------------------:|:------------|
   |0000 0000 0000 1010 0101 0|000 0010 1111|

   So the virtual page number is 330, and 47 is the page offset. So we're
   looking for the 48th byte of the 331th page.

* **Virtual address `0x009B18A0`, with page size of 4K bytes.** A page size of
  4K = 4096 = 2<sup>12</sup>, so the last 12 bits are used as the page offset to
  tell just what byte of the page we want. Therefore the first 20 bits uniquely
  identify this page, and comprise the virtual page number.

   | Virtual Page Number    | Page Offset  |
   |-----------------------:|:-------------|
   |0000 0000 1001 1011 0001|1000 1010 0000|

   So the virtual page number is 2481, and 2208 is the page offset. So we're
   looking for the 2208th byte of the 2481th page.

* **Virtual address `0x009B18A0`, with page size of 2K bytes.** The same
  address, but different page size. A page size of 2K = 2048 = 2<sup>11</sup>,
  so the last 11 bits are used as the page offset to tell just what byte of the
  page we want. Therefore the first 21 bits uniquely identify this page, and
  comprise the virtual page number.

   | Virtual Page Number      | Page Offset |
   |-------------------------:|:------------|
   |0000 0000 1001 1011 0001 1|000 1010 0000|

   So the virtual page number is 4963, and 160 is the page offset. So we're
   looking for the 4964th byte of the 161th page.

## Three Main Parts of Virtual Memory

As implied above, virtual memory consists of three main parts. First, there is
the main memory (RAM), which holds recently used chunks (pages) of memory.
Second, there is the secondary memory (disk), which stores the chunks (pages)
not currently being used. Thirdly, there is the page table, which tells us just
where on the disk or in RAM the particular chunk of data we're looking for is.

### Main Memory (RAM)

The main memory system is where the more recently used pages are stored. Each
page is stored into subdivisions of memory called "frames." A frame size is the
same as our page size. If we have a 4096 byte page size, then each frame will
hold 4096 bytes to accommodate the pages. The first frame will take up actual
addresses `0x00000000` to `0x00000FFF`. The second frame will take up address
`0x00001000` to `0x00001FFF`. Etc. If physical memory is 256 megabytes as it is
on my computer, the last page would be from `0x0FFFF000` to `0x0FFFFFFF`. Notice
that the range of addresses covers 4096 bytes. (It actually be a little more
complicated than that, but for our purposes this will suffice.)

Also, though I used similar numbers in my example of different pages in the
virtual memory space, it is important to remember that in these frames, the
frame that consists of physical addresses `0x00001000` to `0x00001FFF` probably
does not consist of the same data contained in the virtual addresses
`0x00001000` to `0x00001FFF`.

A concept that will become important later is the "frame number." In the example
above, the frame number of the first frame will be 0. The second frame will have
frame number 1. Similarly, the frame number of the physical address `0x0005ACC0`
in a system with a 4K page size will be frame number 0x5A. However, the same
address in a system with a 2K page size will have frame number 0xB5 (comprised
of the leading 21 bits rather than the first 20 bits).

Think of main memory as short term fast storage of the pages we are currently
working on, like a cache.

### Secondary Memory (Disk)

The disk memory is a repository for pages not currently in use. When a page
needs to be brought to memory, the appropriate page is found and transferred to
main memory. Whenever a page that has been modified during its time in main
memory, it is written to disk. Think of the pages on the disk as being in long
term storage.

### The Page Table

The page table is what keeps track of where pages are, and what their properties
are. The system updates the page table as changes in the state of the system
warrant. It makes sense that there are as many entries in the page table as
there are pages in our virtual address space. Therefore, in a virtual address
space addressed by 32 bits, at 4K per page that's 2<sup>20</sup> pages, and
hence 2<sup>20</sup> entries in the page table. The first entry in the page
table contains information about the first page. The second entry contains
information about the second page. Etc. If we have a virtual address with
virtual page number 56 (and hence is the 57th page), we can find information
about that page in the 57th entry in the page table.

### Entry of the Page Table

So what is in an entry of the page table? Since the virtual address and the
physical address need not have much relation to each other, it is important to
know just where we can find memory. Also, we may want to be able to tell certain
things about memory:  Is this page in main memory or on the disk? Has this
memory been written to, in which case we'll have to write it back to disk before
discarding it? What are we allowed to do to this data?

* **Valid Bit**: The valid bit tells us if the memory is currently in main
  memory or if it must be retrieved from secondary memory. When a page is taken
  from disk and put into main memory, the valid bit is set to 1. When a page is
  overwritten in main memory once the system feels we no longer need it, the
  valid bit is set to 0.
* **Dirty Bit**: The dirty bit tells us if memory has been written do during its
  time in main memory. If it has been, then once we discard the memory we must
  write it back to disk. If it hasn't been modified, then we're saved a disk
  write when we get rid of the page in this frame, which speeds the system up.
  When the page is first loaded into memory, its dirty bit is set to 0. If a
  write instruction to that page occurs during its time in memory, then the
  dirty bit is set to 1.
* **Access Control**: A rather primitive form of memory protection, access
  control indicates what we may do to this frame. Do we have access to read,
  read/write, or execute from this frame? In this way programs are prevented
  from doing damage to other data that may belong to other processes.
* **Frame Number**: If the data is in main memory, since any page can be loaded
  into any frame, we have to have some data that tells us just which frame the
  data is at. Hence, the frame number.
* **Disk Location**: If we need to write back data currently in main memory, or
  if we need to read a page that is not in main memory, then we need to know
  where on the disk that data can be found. This is a close analogy to the frame
  number.

## Finding the Real Address

Given a virtual address, we can find its virtual page number by selecting a
certain number of leading bits (the number selected depends on both the sizes of
our virtual address space and the size of our page). From that, the memory
system can access the corresponding entry in the page table to find out just
where this data is, retrieve it from disk if necessary, and then, using the
frame number of the frame to which it was loaded, derive the corresponding
physical address of this virtual address. The process for this can be seen in
slide 12 of lecture 16.

When a memory reference is made, you're given a virtual address. With a page
size of 4K, or 2<sup>12</sup>, and our virtual address space of 2<sup>32</sup>,
we have 2<sup>20</sup> possible pages. The first 20 bits will therefore be the
"virtual page number" for this address.

As an example, suppose we're working with a 4K page size. Take the 32 bit
virtual address `0x00072A4C`, which in 32-bit binary is:

```text
0000 0000 0000 0111 0010 1010 0100 1100
```

The leading 20 bits of that are our page number, since the rightmost 12 bits
must be used to determine where in the page the byte we're trying to access is.
The page number is therefore 1110010<sub>2</sub> = 114<sub>10</sub>. The rest of
the bits, 101001001100<sub>2</sub> = 2636<sub>10</sub>, is our page offset.

For the purposes of simplicity, let's say the page table has as many entries as
there are possible pages... that is, 2<sup>20</sup> = 1048576 entries. There is
a direct correspondence between the entires in the page table and the pages in
DISK, e.g., the 23rd page corresponds to the 23rd entry in the page table.

After we have the virtual page number, we look up the corresponding entry in the
page table. In our example of the address `0x00072A4E`, that's page number 114
(as shown above). So, we look at entry 114 in our page table. An example of an
entry in the page table may be seen in lecture 16, slide 12, and has a valid
bit, a dirty bit, an access control field, and a frame number.

If it *is* valid, then another field in this entry tells us what frame in
*memory* it is at (the frame number). We now have the frame. Using the frame
number and the page offset, we can now compute the physical address through
roughly the process described on slide 12 of the lecture 16 notes.

If the page we seek is not already loaded into main memory (that is, the valid
bit is not set so that we encounter a page fault), then the page must be loaded
into a frame in main memory before any reading or writing by the program may
occur. We must find a frame to load into.

### Selecting a Frame to Replace on Page Fault (NRU and LRU)

Through what mechanism do we select a page that we want to replace? I will
describe the "not recently used" algorithm in this section. The flow chart below
has a brief summary of it in its upper right-hand box. Also, the algorithm is
described on slide 17 of lecture 16.

Suppose that we have an additional data structure that defines a bit for each
frame in main memory, and suppose this bit is called "recently used" (RU). Also
suppose we have a pointer to the frame that was last replaced called the "last
replaced pointer" (LRP). What not recently used does is it looks at the LRP,
increments LRP by one (looping around if we're past the last frame), and checks
the frame. Is the RU bit set? If it is not (or if the frame is still empty), we
have a frame that we can load data into. If it is set, we skip over this frame,
but we set its recently used bit false before repeating this process and
incrementing LRP to the next frame.

RU is set to true whenever a memory access (read or write) to that address
occurs, to tell the machine that yes, someone is using the page in this frame,
so don't get rid of it yet.

There are optimizations to this algorithm. For example, in the assignment PC,
we adjusted this algorithm so that it favors replacing pages whose dirty bits
are not set, to avoid the extra time of a drive write whenever possible. I'm
not going to go into it aside from mentioning that such an optimization exists.

There is another replacement algorithm called "least recently used" (LRU), and
it is exactly analogous to the replacement policy used by fully associative
cache. Essentially, you keep track of the exact history of frame accesses, and
replace the one that was accessed least recently.

### Replacing the Frame

Ideally this frame will be empty, but if the frame already holds data, several
steps must be taken. I go through the basics of the steps here.

1. First, we find a suitable frame in main memory to copy the desired page to.
   This can be done any number of ways, but the way that we've had the most
   experience with is the not recently used algorithm.
2. Once a frame is found that we can load into, we check to see if there is data
   in this frame; your method for doing this may vary. If there isn't, we can
   copy our page from secondary to main memory without consideration of what was
   there... since there wasn't anything there in the first place... so skip to
   step 5.
3. If there is data already in this page frame, the "valid bit" in the page
   table for which this page is a copy must be cleared to signify that the page
   we're replacing may no longer be found in main memory.
4. Further, if the data we're to get rid of has been modified (ie, the "dirty
   bit" is active), the changed page must be written back to DISK so that
   changes are not lost.
5. Copy the data we want to load from the page in DISK to the appropriate frame
   in main memory. In the page table, for the element of this page, set the
   valid bit to 1 (since the page is now held in main memory), the dirty bit to
   0 (because this is new virgin data exactly as it is in secondary memory), and
   put the frame number of the frame to which we loaded it in "frame number."

Now that we know that the data is in this frame (we just copied it, after all),
we can compute a physical address based on the frame number and the page offset
(again based on the process described in lecture 16, slide 12).

### Summary : Virtual to Physical Address

Once all this detail is taken care of, the formula for deriving the actual
physical address from the virtual address is simple. You take the virtual
address, extract the virtual page number, look up the corresponding entry in the
page table, and in the virtual address replace the virtual page number with the
frame number. Voilà. You have the physical address. Once this translation is
made and we're assured that the data we want is in main memory, it may be
accessed without any trouble.

[Here is a link to a flow chart describing the above process graphically.][vmpdf]

[vmpdf]: /assets/csarch_notes/vm_convert.pdf
