---
layout: post
title:  "Reduced Machine Instruction Tutorial"
date:   2000-09-01
---

This document is intended to provide examples of simple programs written in the
RMI that demonstrate basic programming in RMI, as well as outline what you can
and cannot do when programming with RMI. RMI is created by Professor Wagner, and
serves as an example of an instruction set with minimal syntax, but potentially
unlimited functionality. RMI serves the basis for problem P3.

* Table of contents
{:toc}

## How this `#define` Stuff is Supposed to Work

For the curious...

The definitions that pepper the program are what are called macros. Suppose we
have this definition at the beginning of our source code.

```c
#define SUB(X,A,B) \
        X = (A=A) - B; ICT++;
```

After that, supposing we had three variables `x`, `y`, and `z`, we can subtract
`y` from `z` and store the result in `x` through by inserting the following in
our code.

```c
SUB(x, y, z);
```

This looks similar to a function, and for most intents and purposes you can get
away with treating it as such. However, it is not a function. What actually
happens is that when you compile your code, something called the preprocessor
goes through your code and looks for these macros. Suppose it runs into that
`SUB(x, y, z)`. It takes those codes, and since the `x` is in the `X` place, and
the `y` is in the `A` place, and the `z` is in the `B` place, wherever in that
definition there is an `X` you get an `x`, wherever there is an `A` you get a
`y`, and wherever there is a `B` you get a `z`. This snippet of code then
replaces the invocation of `SUB` in your source, and once all these macros have
been replaced *then* the program is compiled. So, in the end, it's as though you
typed in the following line of code:

```c
x = (y=y) - z; ICT++;
```

Note that the `X`, `A`, `B` are not variables in themselves. They are merely
"placeholders" that are replaced with whatever _text_ you pass them. It doesn't
even have to be anything valid. If you say:

```c
SUB(and surely the future shall be better for thee than the past,
    and in the end shall your Lord be bounteous to thee, and thou
    be satisfied);
```

that will yield (if I'm not mistaken)

```text
and surely the future shall be better for thee than the past = (and
in the end shall your Lord be bounteous to thee=and in the end shall
your Lord be bounteous to thee) - and thou be satisfied; ICT++;
```

The theological implications are enormous, I suppose, but what's important is
that you see how macros in the preprocessor can be used (and misused), and also
that these defined macros are not so much about passing values as they are about
copying text.

About the `\`'s, in case you wonder, this is taken from the assignment
description for the RMI homework:

> The "`\`" that terminates some lines in the #defines "continues" the
> definition to another line of input; the "body" of a `#define` extends to the
> end of the current logical line of text. To allow "define bodies" of several
> input lines, the "`\`" is used to end intermediate input lines that don't end
> the logical line.

But you already knew that, since you read the assignment description. Didn't
you?

## Details

### Setting Up your RMI Environment

Now, all of these examples suppose that you are sufficiently intelligent enough
to have already "cut and pasted" the RMI instructions, and were also man (or
woman) enough to implement the special shortcuts (`ADD` and `BNZ`). A short note
you must heed...

```c
#define BNZ(A,S) \
        BLTZ(A,S); \
        SUB(t,Zero,A);  \
        BLTZ(T,S);
```

The temp variable `t` that Prof. Wagner mentions in the description, which is
necessary for this `BNZ` to work, is misrepresented as `T` in the last `BLTZ`
instruction. Simply change `T` to `t`, and it executes the intended function.
"Which is?" We'll get to that.

Like the assignment description says, the `ADD` and `BNZ` quasi-instructions
both make use of the variables `t` and `Zero`, with the variable `Zero` always
remaining `0`; in order for the `ADD` and `BNZ` instructions to work properly,
these variables have to be declared. The assignment description also suggests
setting up a variable `M1` to always hold `-1`.

### About `XIT()`

There was some small confusion regarding `XIT()`.

```c
#define XIT() \
        printf("%d RMI Instructions executed.\n", ICT);
```

One person asked me during my office hours yesterday, "now, this `XIT` macro,
*how* does it end the program?"  It doesn't, really. All it does is print how
many RMI instructions you used (if you'll notice, there are `ICT++` in every
basic RMI instruction, so the variable `ICT` keeps a running count). Technically
speaking, you could insert `XIT()`s throughout your entire program.

However, since the idea is to see how many RMI instructions your program
executes during the entire course of its execution, you'd better insert it right
at the end of your program just before the end of the `main()` statement lest
the grader suspect you of chicanery.

### About Procedures

You're allowed to call procedures and pass values to them, but you can only
return values from the procedure through use of a global variable. However, for
P3 you really needn't use procedures, and just looking over my code for P3, I
don't see how a procedure could have helped me out at all, really. However, your
mileage may vary.

### Stuff you *Can't* Do

Supposing you have the integer `myInt`, and you want to add it to itself. You
*can't* do something like

```c
SUB(myInt, myInt, -myInt);
```

The reason is that when you write `(-myInt)`, you're performing an operation on
myInt. Basically, every variable you use in your program beyond the initial
declaration of the variable must appear in an RMI instruction by itself, with no
pendants or operators attached to it. All operations must be done using the RMI
instructions.

However, that is not to say that you can't do something like the following:

```c
SUB(myInt, myInt, -4);
```

`-4` is just a simple constant, so you *can* do that.

```c
BLTZ(-1, SomeLabel);
```

Whenever you use an RMI instruction, if the corresponding "placeholder" is an
`X` or an `A`, you *must* use a variable in that place in order for it to be
considered correct. However, if it's a B, feel free to use a constant.

## Example Code

Okay, now that the preamble is done with, time for the good stuff... the meat
and potatoes, if you will. In all of these examples, to save space I only
include the "main()" function. I assume that `#include <stdio.h>` and the
"#defines" Prof. Wagner provided and the global variables `ICT`, `t`, `Zero`,
and `M1` have all been implemented correctly. I'm not going to tell you outright
how to put it together, and I don't provide it partly because it would take up
so much room and partly because people would simply cut and paste if I did, and
use that as a starting template for their code. First of all, setting it up is
simple to do, and if you find it's *not* simple to do, that reveals a lack of
understanding on your part of C convention, so it's good that you struggle to
get it right so that you actually learn.

In many example I provide sample runs of the program from the command line. I
always compile my programs as "tester".

Let's look at some simple programs.

### The Idiotic Calculator

This is a simple calculator that only performs subtraction (and is hence
idiotic). What it does is accepts two numbers, subtract the second from the
first, and print the result.

```c
main() {
  int operand1, operand2, result;

  R("%d", operand1);
  R("%d", operand2);
  SUB(result, operand1, operand2);
  
  P("%d-", operand1);
  P("%d=", operand2);
  P("%d\n", result);
  
  XIT();
}
```

After some integer variable declarations, `R("%d", operand1)` reads a number
into `operand1`, and `R("%d", operand2)` reads a number into `operand2`. Then,
we get `result=operand1-operand2` by executing `SUB(result, operand1,
operand2)`. After that, `P("%d-", operand1)` prints out the value of `operand1`
plus a negative sign, `P("%d=", operand2)` prints out the value of `operand2`
plus an equals sign, and `P("%d\n", result)` prints out the result of the
subtraction, the variable `result`, and tacks on a line feed. The program then
calls `XIT()` to see how many RMI instructions were called, and the program
terminates.

Some runs of this simple program are provided below.

```shell
[98] twf@teer15% tester
4 9
4-9=-5
6 RMI instructions executed.
[99] twf@teer15% tester
100000 1 
100000-1=99999
6 RMI instructions executed.
```

Not a strenuous mental exercise by any stretch, but let's see if we can't make
things a bit more interesting with discussion of elementary control flow.

### Countdown Program (with simple control flow)

Remember when you were eight and first learning how to program, and your
favorite program you created was the countdown program written on an Apple IIe
in BASIC that read in a number and counted down from that mark? No? Well then,
you had a deprived and sheltered childhood. I pity you and pray for your
immortal soul.

The thing is, RMI is a lot like BASIC. Remember writing `GOTO 10` and `GOTO 495`
and `GOTO` this and `GOTO` that, and each line of "code" you wrote was prefixed
with a number? Well, unbeknownst to many novice programmers, that feature
(albeit in a slightly more sophisticated form) survives in the modern
programming languages to this day. It has great applications like breaking out
of ugly nested loops and the like, but for our purposes we'll use it for simple
control flow, just like BASIC did.

So now although the `R` (read), `P` (print), ADD (uh, add), and `SUB` (subtract)
have an obvious mnemonic name that gives away what they do, the instruction
`BLTZ` and quasi-instruction `BNZ` are less obvious: they are "Branch if Less
Than Zero" and "Branch if Not Zero."

Notice those lines in that code that are a single line ended with a colon (:).
Shouldn't that be a semicolon (;), you ask? No. These things are called labels.
Ignoring the RMI for a second, let's look at some straight C code.

```c
#include <stdio.h>
main() {
  goto PastThePrintf;
  printf("Wah! I'll never be printed!\n");
 PastThePrintf:
}
```

What this program does upon execution is, when it reaches the `goto
PastThePrintf`, it actually goes directly to the point in the code where it says
`PastThePrintf:`, and resumes execution from there. If you run it, you'll notice
that `Wah! I'll never be printed!` is never printed.

In RMI you *cannot* use `goto` statements on their own, but must call them in
the context of the RMI instruction `BLTZ` and quasi-instruction `BNZ` that use
them.

Looking at the #define statement for `BLTZ`...

```c
#define BLTZ(A,S) \
        ICT++; if (A&lt;0) goto S;
```

So, if whatever variable you give in place of `A` is less than zero, it goes to
the label represented by `S`.

This functionality can be demonstrated in an example. So, without further ado,
here is a countdown program that offers some simple control flow.

```c
main() {
  int countDown;
  
  R("%d", countDown);
  BLTZ(countDown, JustExit);
  BLTZ(M1, DoCount);
  
 BeginLoop:
  SUB(countDown, countDown, 1);
 DoCount:
  P("%d...\n", countDown);
  BNZ(countDown, BeginLoop);
  P("BLAST OFF!\n", M1);

 JustExit:
  XIT();
}
```

After the initial variable declaration of `countDown`, the program reads a value
into `countDown` using `R("%d", countDown)`. It then tests this number to see if
it's less than zero using `BLTZ(countDown, JustExit)` (that is, branch if less
than zero).

If `countDown` is less than zero, the program jumps to `JustExit`, where it runs
into `XIT()`, which prints out the number of RMI instructions executed.

However, if `countDown` is not less than zero, it simply executes the next
instructions, `BLTZ(M1, DoCount)`. Since `M1 == -1`, and `-1 &lt; 0`, it will
jump to `DoCount:`. The next instruction past `DoCount:` is `P("%d...\n",
countDown)`, which prints out the number of our countdown. The next instruction
is `BNZ`... branch if not zero... of the form `BNZ(countDown, BeginLoop)`. That
is, if countdown != 0, then `goto BeginLoop`.

If we entered 10 for our `countDown` variable, since 10 != 0, we `goto
BeginLoop` and the next instruction is `SUB(countDown, countDown, 1)`. This
merely decrements `countDown` by one. Then the `P("%d...\n", countDown)`
instruction is executed again, etc etc etc.

Eventually, `countDown` *will* equal zero, and when that happens,
`BNZ(countDown, BeginLoop)` will not jump to `BeginLoop`. It allows the program
to continue working, and the next statement is `P("BLAST OFF!\n", M1)`. Notice
my use of `M1` even though there is no conversion specifier for a number in the
format string `"BLAST OFF!\n"`. However, I need to put some variable in that
second `P` argument, and so I just insert `M1` as a "dummy" variable. I could
have juts as well have used `countDown` or `Zero` or whatever.

Here are some sample runs of this program. Notice how when you insert a negative
number (-10 is used in this example) the program does nothing.

```shell
[106] twf@teer15% tester
10
10...
9...
8...
7...
6...
5...
4...
3...
2...
1...
0...
BLAST OFF!
58 RMI instructions executed.
[107] twf@teer15% tester
-10
2 RMI instructions executed.
[108] twf@teer15% tester
0
0...
BLAST OFF!
8 RMI instructions executed.
```

<A NAME="example_negative"></A>
<H3>The Negative Tester</H3>

This program tests to see whether an input number is negative or not.

```c
main() {
  int myInt;

  R("%d", myInt);
  BLTZ(myInt, IsNegative);
  P("It's not negative!\n", Zero);
  BLTZ(M1, PastNegativeTest);
 IsNegative:
  P("It IS negative!\n", Zero);
 PastNegativeTest:
  XIT();
}
```

What this program does is read in a single number, and tell whether it is
negative or not. Tracing through the program, first we have the declaration of
myInt. Then, we have `R("%d", myInt)`, which reads in a number from `stdin`.
Then, we have `BLTZ(myInt, IsNegative)`.

If myInt is less than zero, then we branch to the label `IsNegative`. The next
instruction is `P("It IS negative!\n", Zero)`. This simply prints out `It IS
negative!`, as you might guess, but the reason I also include a `Zero` there is
because the `P` RMI instruction requires that a variable be passed. Since I am
not printing out a variable, simply a line of text, I just pass along `Zero`. I
could just have easily passed along `myInt`, `t`, `M1`, or anything else you'd
like, just so long as it is a variable. Once done with that, the next
instruction executed is `XIT()`, which prints the number of RMI instructions
used.

If `myInt` is not less than zero, that is, if the `BLTZ(myInt, IsNegative)` does
not result in a branch to "IsNegative", the program continues on its merry way
without interruption, arriving at the `P("It's not negative!\n", Zero)`
statement. Note again that I used `Zero` as a "dummy" variable for `P`. The next
line is `BLTZ(M1, PastNegativeTest)`. Note that since M1 has been defined to be
`-1`, this branch condition will *always* be satisfied, so that it *always*
branches directly to `PastNegativeTest`. The reason why we want this is so that
the `P("It IS negative!", Zero)` RMI instruction is skipped over and not
executed. After all, it simply will not do to have the program saying that a
number is both not negative and negative. After that, the `XIT()` instruction is
executed, and the program terminates.

Here are some sample runs of the program.

```shell
[75] twf@teer15% tester
5
It's not negative!
4 RMI instructions executed.
[76] twf@teer15% tester
-6
It IS negative!
3 RMI instructions executed.
[77] twf@teer15% tester
0
It's not negative!
4 RMI instructions executed.
```

### The Imbecilic Calculator

Not quite as stupid as the idiotic calculator, but still pretty stupid, is the
imbecilic calculator. It performs addition *and* subtraction.

```c
main() {
  int operand1, operand2, temp, result;
  char myOperator;
  
  R("%d", operand1);
  R("%c", myOperator);
  R("%d", operand2);

  SUB(temp, myOperator, '+');
  BNZ(temp, IsNotAddition);
  
  /* Now we know myOperator is '+', so we do addition */
  ADD(result, operand1, operand2);
  BLTZ(M1, ProduceOutput);
  
 IsNotAddition:
  SUB(temp, myOperator, '-');
  BNZ(temp, JustExit);
  
  /* Now we know myOperator is '-', so we do subtraction */
  SUB(result, operand1, operand2);

 ProduceOutput:
  P("%d", operand1);
  P("%c", myOperator);
  P("%d=", operand2);
  P("%d\n", result);
  
 JustExit:
  XIT();
}
```

Rather than go through line by line, now that your understanding is somewhat
more advanced, presumably, I'm going to simply give the gist of the program.
After some `int` and `char` variable declarations, a number, a character, and
another number is read in. That character is *supposed* to be either a `-` or a
`+`.

(Note that this input scheme is not robust: input *must* be of the form `5+3`
and not something like `5 + 3` with spaces between the numbers and operators,
because after reading the 5, the next char to be read will be a space, leading
the program to not recognize that an operator was input. I *could* have designed
a more robust income scheme, even with something as primitive as RMI, but that
would take more time and would be confusing.)

The next thing is that `'+'`, the ASCII value for the character `+`, is
subtracted from `myOperator` and stored in `temp`. If `myOperator` is `'+'`,
then obviously `temp` will hold zero. We then branch to `IsNotAddition` if
`temp` is not zero, and hence `myOperator` is not `'+'`.

However, if this branch is not satisfied and `temp` is zero, we know that the
operator is `+`, so we add `operand1` with `operand2`, and store the result in
`result`. Then we jump to `ProduceOutput`. (More on this later.)

If the branch *is* satisfied, we go to the `IsNotAddition` label. We then test
to see if `myOperator` is `'-'` in the same way we tested to see if `myOperator`
is `'+'`. If it isn't, then `myOperator` is neither `'+'` nor `'-'`, so we jump
to `JustExit`, producing no output.

However, if we don't jump, then we know that `myOperator` is `'-'`, so we
subtract `operand2` from `operand1`, and store the result in `result`. Now, the
portion of code that did the jump to `ProduceOutput` in our addition code was
necessary, but since the code to produce output is right below the subtract code
anyway, any jump is unnecessary.

The code following the `ProduceOutput` label simply prints out the expression
the user gave on entering the program, and prints the result.

Here are some sample runs.

```shell
[89] twf@teer15% tester
4%6
7 RMI instructions executed.
[90] twf@teer15% tester
5+9
5+9=14
14 RMI instructions executed.
[91] twf@teer15% tester
5-100
5-100=-95
16 RMI instructions executed.
```

That should just about do it.
