---
layout: post
title:  "Orion: The Space Flight Simulator"
date:   2010-05-24T16:48
---

When I was much younger, still on my first computer, my parents gave me a
voluminous 240 MB hard drive for my Mac IIcx. Upon connecting the drive, I found
among other contents a shareware spaceflight simulator, [Orion][orion], the work
of one [Robert Munafo][munafo]. This serendipitous acquisition quickly became
one of my favorite programs. With this program, one controls a spacecraft by
applying thrust, roll, pitch, and yaw, and has a capability to travel to any
star system within a 32 light-year radius (all of these helpfully had 9 planets,
Pluto being considered a planet at the time). By flying at a planet in just
right way and executing some slightly deft maneuvering, one could enter orbit.
By executing the maneuver incorrectly, you'd fall into the planet or, more
likely, get flung out past escape velocity back into the star system.

![Mars](/assets/blog/mars-orion2.png){: width=300 height=225}

Pictured is a screenshot of Orion's mighty workings. All controls are shown in
the lower ribbon. By modern standards the control system is obtuse, but for 1988
at a time when people were still figuring out how computer interfaces should
work, it was quite excellent. One turned the ship by holding the mouse down in
the lower left box, with the direction and magnitude of the turn indicated by
the offset of the click from the center dot. The F/S/R buttons controlled the
motion of the ship, being forward/stop/reverse. The next box allowed one to
perform lateral thrust. The top bar allowed one to roll. Then there was a
control for easy mode, with non-easy mode resulting in Newtonian motion (once
you applied thrust in a direction, turning did not redirect your velocity) and
the application of gravity. Remaining controls toggled display elements.

This program was enormously fun and instructive.

First, it gave me a healthy appreciation of the vast scale of the universe. At
first blush it may sound like a 32 light-year long leash is not terribly
restrictive, but the paucity of "interesting" stars that lie in that sphere soon
becomes clear. That limit quickly seems unbearably oppressive. (For example,
none of the interesting stars actually in the constellation Orion can be visited
within the program Orion. ðŸ™‚)

It also gave me an intuitive feel for Kepler's laws, especially as it applied to
elliptical orbits and the inverse relationship between orbital distance and
velocity as I flew in orbit around a planet, many many years before I learned
that they were called Kepler's laws. ("Hey, when I'm twice as far away, I'm
going half the speed...")

Quite apart from anything having to do with space and more appealing to my
nascent interest in software engineering, seeing my orbital parameters
(major/minor axis) slowly change over time when they realistically should not
have changed gave me an appreciation for the role approximate arithmetic takes
in software simulations of physical systems, and the dangers of accumulated
numerical error.

Less intellectually, then, as now, I was a fan of [Star Trek TNG][tng] and liked
to pretend I was flying in the [USS Enterprise][enterprise]. The [supposedly
impossibly fast Warp 9][warp] amounts to a paltry and pitiful 1,516 times the
speed of light (roughly 3 AU per second), meaning that a trip from earth to the
Alpha Centauri system would take almost exactly 24 hours. My preteen brain found
this a sobering and disappointing realization. Nonetheless, I decided to make
the trip one day. Pretending my bedroom was a spaceship cabin and my computer
the helm (naturally allowances were made to leave the room for the bathroom and
food), I set my sights for Rigel Kent and accelerated to Warp 9. During the
daylong journey I read, periodically corrected my course, and overnight I slept.
Roughly a day later I arrived at Rigel Kent, whereupon I &"explored" all the
planets. I was oddly proud of myself for completing the journey, but the tedium
did give the lie to the notion of Jean Luc Picard and company casually dropping
by Earth from the far reaches with the same ease of someone today traveling from
New York to Boston.

With the help of [Basilisk II][basilisk2], I was able to use Orion once again
for the first time in about two decades. Aside from the usual shock I encounter
using ancient software &mdash; e.g., the old Mac design philosophy of never
using keyboard controls, the help box with a snail-mail address and no sign of a
@ or .com anywhere, the usual hiccups of software when running on a computer
thousands of times the speed of the Soviet era hardware it was designed for
&mdash; it was quite enjoyable, and wonderfully nostalgic. So, thank you Robert!
Sorry I never sent you $7, but my ten year old brain didn't quite have a fully
developed sense of social responsibility.

![Orion Credit](/assets/blog/orion-credit.png){: width=77 height=63 style="filter: invert();"}

[orion]: http://macintoshgarden.org/games/orion
[munafo]: http://www.mrob.com/pub/index.html
[tng]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Star_Trek:_The_Next_Generation
[enterprise]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/USS_Enterprise_%28NCC-1701-D%29
[warp]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Warp_drive_%28Star_Trek%29
[basilisk2]: http://basilisk.cebix.net/