---
layout: post
title:  "The Awful Tychus Findlay"
date:   2010-08-19T21:43
---

I've been enjoying the single player campaign of Starcraft II. It's great fun.
The tremendous variety of goals and mechanics of each level makes each level a
very unique fresh experience. They are not so much "levels" per se, but more
mini-games with rules all their own which just happen to use Starcraft units as
gamepieces. The Mass-Effect-like mechanics of collecting resources which you
spend on troop upgrades in between missions is likewise really engaging.

The story of that campaign is another matter entirely. Though the technical
*mechanics* of the storytelling have advanced considerably beyond the disjoint
unsynced-talking-heads-in-squares of yore, the actual *writing* is horrifyingly
bad, a Transformers-2-esque grab-bag of cliches. It's not that I expect high
literature, but some small measure of coherence and sense would be appreciated.
What is more, the shoddy writing is quite incongruous with the obvious care and
love of craftsmanship that went into gameplay.

Things were rough from the start. When we first reacquaint ourselves with Jim
Raynor, the game's hero, he's drinking hard liquor and watching TV. As it
happens, one of the game's villains is on TV, talking about *him*! This angers
Jim, so we're treated to a hearty "it ain't over till it's over you son of a
bitch!" And he shoots the TV with a revolver. Wow.

That was actually one of the more tolerable sequences, if for no better reason
than for the absence of our *second* hero, Jim's old buddy Tychus Findlay. Like
all the characters, Findlay's conversational repertoire is mostly limited to
trite one liners, but he is rendered all the more intolerable by his
characterization; he's a bulky muscle-headed half-wit who talks in a languid
southern drawl. It's somehow much more annoying than I just made it sound.

I list here a few gems of Tychus, prefixed by their context:

The zerg have attacked the human worlds. The death toll is in the billions
(somehow billions of humans arose from forty thousand original settlers in the
span of two hundred years; whatever). Tychus has just finished watching a video
where Kerrigan herself rips apart a squad of armed soldiers with her bare hands.
His appraisal of this threat? "Seems this queen of blades got everybody runnin'
scared! She don't look so tough!" Right. You can take her Tychus! Please, go for
it.

Raynor rescues survivors of a human colony. Their leader, a doctor who becomes
your resident scientist, has seen the deaths of her fellow colonists, the
destruction of her home, and other miscellaneous horror, doom, destruction, etc.
How does Tychus comfort her? "I asked that sweet thang if she'd like to give me
a physical." Yeah... I think most people outgrow that chestnut by the time they
reach their teens.

These selfsame colonists then settle on a new world, whereupon they are infested
with the "zerg virus" which turns them into shambling zombies. His expert
analysis? "Those colonists sure do have some zerg troubles!"

Oh, Tychus... Tychus Tychus. You insufferable jackass.

He's utterly redundant, and from his introduction he's clearly there so that he
can betray Raynor at some critical point. I'm a little unclear on whether we're
supposed to know this or not; it seems really clear, but they keep foreshadowing
in a way which suggests it's supposed to be a mystery to us? I do wish they'd
get it over with and be done with the beef slab. However, owing to the
"multipath" mission structure, it would be technically awkward for it to happen
anytime soon.

--------

OK, I have now finished Starcraft II. The campaign missions remained
delightfully fun and varied. They even managed to make the RPG squad based
missions tolerable. Unfortunately, the writing remained execrable and senseless.
I'm rather amused by how inept it is, so I think I'll continue my screed.

Regarding the betrayal, Tychus waited to the absolute end to betray Raynor, so
we had to suffer through his mouth breathing charm the entire game. Throughout
the game it seemed clear the writer didn't expect us to know Tychus was going to
betray Raynor, which I found really confusing, given Findlay's introduction with
Mengsk talking about the price he's going to pay for his freedom. The betrayal
was: he had been blackmailed by Mengsk into killing Kerrigan. Yeah. So, I'm
trying to comprehend Mengsk's plan here. Mengsk wanted to kill Kerrigan; fair
enough. He somehow felt that the best way to accomplish this was to let this
random criminal Tychus go free, and blackmail Tychus so that, on the off chance
he encountered Kerrigan, and Kerrigan was vulnerable, Tychus would shoot her. As
far as plans go, that's impossibly stupid; its success relies on a confluence of
highly implausible events and happenstances that would have been impossible to
anticipate at the time when Tychus was released. What is more, at the time
Tychus was released, absolutely no one would have needed to be *blackmailed*
into killing Kerrigan – anyone would have been only too eager to do so. The
plan, and hence the plot, doesn't make one iota of sense.

On the subject of Kerrigan, she was one of the more regrettable casualties of
the terrible writing. Starcraft I's writing and story were uneven, perhaps, but
it often succeeded in making Kerrigan delightfully evil. Under the tender
mercies of Starcraft II's writers, though, she has been diminished to petulant
incoherent outbursts. Here are two examples. She gives her first line in the
campaign after you've stolen an alien artifact from under her nose: "I forgot
how resourceful you were, Jim. I won't make that mistake twice!" Aside from
being trite, such a statement renders her impotent. Obviously you're going to
win, and continue being resourceful, so this declaration becomes nothing more
than empty words. She clearly makes the mistake not just *twice*, but repeatedly
again and again through the course of the campaign. So, we lead off by making
our lead villain appear ineffective and weak. Nice. The last thing she says in
the final mission is "you will pay for this treachery" after you beat back the
last of her attacks. I found the comment bewildering. So... um, defense is
treachery? This rather makes me suspect the writer doesn't know the definition
of treachery. This seems likely given the volume of other malaprops.

Then we have our hero's characterization. Jim Raynor is supposed to be a
pathetic drunk. We are treated to lots of scenes of him drinking, and in any one
of these scenes he drinks *a lot*, gulping down in a single instant twice what
I'd be hard pressed to imbibe over the course of a lengthy evening. Curiously,
in no way is he ever affected *at all* by his drinking. Part of having a
character be a pathetic drunk is that he is *drunk*. That's kind of an important
component of that characterization that they somehow missed. I wouldn't have
guessed it was even possible to make that oversight.

Aside from content, we have some weaknesses introduced by the technical aspects.
The non-linear structure has some disconcerting effects. You go from
discrediting Mengsk and fighting his primary military commander (the
imaginatively named "General Warfield"), to fighting shoulder to shoulder
alongside this same commander. He accepts your help without so much as a
sidelong glance, and with Mengsk seemingly as powerful as ever. More broadly,
the nonlinear progress often gets in the way of telling a cohesive story; the
pieces of the story are necessarily modular, but a story itself is almost by
definition non-modular; a modular part of a story is a part you can do without.
Further, that you can talk to people in any order means that all conversations
occur seemingly in a vacuum. The overall effect is a heightened sense of
emotional flatness and meaninglessness, almost like everyone has been
lobotomized, or that I was observing it through a dream. I think this might be a
general problem with non-linear structure; I observed a similar uncanny effect
with Mass Effect 2 – though strangely, Dragon Age had similar non-linear
mechanics and avoided the uncanny effect somehow.

All this said, I'm perfectly delighted with Starcraft II. In the end I bought a
game, not a novel, and the game itself is stellar. It's not like story matters
all that much in an RTS compared to, say, an RPG. I'm just rather amused the
story is as bad as it is.
