---
layout: post
title:  "Circular/Radial Photography"
date:   2010-06-29T23:49
---

Photographs are rectangular. Historically, this makes sense; when photography
was first invented, it was the film (or rather, photographic plates) that cost
the most money versus, say, the lens, and obviously one makes the best use of
the raw material of plates by cutting it into rectangles, and later the lengthy
rolls of plastic film were put to best use by partitioning it into rectangles.
(Hexagons could potentially work for no wastage, but this would be far more
awkward, especially when it came time to put them in a roll.)

Digital cameras don't use plates or film any more, but reusable sensors. A
single sensor is reused for many thousands of photos, and so there is no reason
to efficiently partition a physical medium into many subparts as there is with
film.

Lenses are circular, and correspondingly image degradation (whether vignetting
or other distortion) increases roughly as the distance from some center on the
photographic plane. If we suppose there's some maximum distance beyond which one
cannot get a good image, the "useful" area of a photographic plane is circular.
To accommodate rectangular film without wasting any of this film, whatever
portion of the circle we use is a rectangle inscribed in this useful circle,
meaning we are wasting at least (1-2/π) ≈ 36% of the useful circle, and that's
only if the rectangle is a square. With my own camera's 2:3 aspect ratio, that's
about 41% wastage. (As a practical matter, it is more like 63% or so for an EF
lens, I think, since it's a crop sensor; that's astonishing waste.) As megapixel
sensor density continues to increase, we shall feel the cost of the
corresponding lens wastage keenly, since the amount of meaningful detail sensors
can gather begins to exceed the capabilities of all but very expensive lenses.

So, now we come to my point: digital cameras have obviated film wastage, but the
rectangular shape inherited from film cameras continues to waste lens
resolution. Clearly this is wrong. It is time to revisit the concept of the
"rectangular" photo, to literally think outside the box. Rather than having
rectangular digital sensors, let us have circular ones, and spread out that
sensor resolution to cover all of the useful circle of the photographic plane.

Obviously for many applications one will still want rectangular photos, but if
you wish to subset and crop your photos to be rectangular, that will be *your
choice*. In the present rectangular paradigm, one has no choice at all.

This "radial" mode of photography would have many advantages.

The primary advantage is that when you buy a lens, you get to use all of it, not
just about half of it. We pay good money for the glass only to ignore a sizable
chunk of it.

There are some practical cost reasons why one could not make a photographic
plane cover the entire useful field. In such a case, even if your image sensor
remains the same size but has been reformed into a circle, you have given up the
lower quality corners for real estate much closer to the lens center, which
presumably suffers from less distortion.

Second, a photograph is more or less identical no matter the orientation of the
camera. There's no need to think about whether to photograph a subject landscape
or portrait, nor even to be sure you're keeping the horizon level. These would
be details left to post processing, and totally irrelevant considerations at the
time the photo is actually taken. This frees up one's attention for other
matters.

Third, lots of subjects benefit stylistically from being photographed in a
circle, right up to the edge of vignetting and distortion &ndash; typical shots
of faces, flowers, birds not in flight, and lengthy roads winding into the
distance come to mind right off the bat &ndash; which is currently an effect one
has to do with filters or post processing.
